---
layout: default
title: Project Narratives
description: "This section expands on the reasoning behind my chosen artifact, as well as the challenges and subsequent learning that followed as I implemented three primary categories of enhancements."
---

# Project Narratives: The Development and Learning Process 

---

## Artifact Background

My chosen artifact to enhance was Advising_Assistance_Program.cpp. It was a simple menu loop that allowed users to input a csv file, print out student courses alphanumerically, and print out course prerequisites. I submitted this artifact originally in 2024 as a part of CS 300 (data structures/algorithms). I selected this artifact because I saw points of improvement that aligned with my career goal of being a data analyst. The components that support my skillset are the database connection, configuration and security, alongside using a hash table to improve performance while simulating a cached database. The combined efforts of secure data retrieval in a CRUD application with accompanying RBAC simulation is a rounded demonstration of my skillset. 

### Challenges and Learning Experiences

My most significant learning moments in the beginning came when I began leveraging the c++/MySQL connector library to create prepared statements for CRUD functions. I got needed practice with the placeholder syntax logic, and learned/implemented write through vs write back caching. The largest challenge in the initial process was making sense of how to translate a DATE MySql type to the hash table and vice versa. I was already aware that the hashtable would hold DATEs as a string, but the challenge lied with ensuring the user entered a proper format when writing to the database. Beyond that the input also had to be valid in respect to each month’s span/leap year for realism’s sake. Thankfully the <regex> library combined with a separate leap year logic function made it possible to detect the format/validity of the user’s input before the operation succeeded. 

Regarding databases, I chose to include this artifact to enhance as it had no database interaction initially. This allowed me to display my ability to design secure interactions between application logic and databases. I expanded functionality in this category by first populating the database and establishing a connection via environmental variables to avoid exposing credentials in code. This was followed up with integrating application CRUD logic with the database, with particular attention being put on an auto incremented primary key (for student IDs) write-through logic to ensure data consistency. Lastly I’ve implemented TDE (transparent data encryption) to protect the files at rest. I initially began implementing encryption through the deprecated plugin method before researching and committing to the modern keyring component approach. My largest hurdle involving enhancing the database category was employing RBAC. More specifically I would've liked to fully implement hashing/salting the password storage via bcrypt, but lacked the time to do so properly. While this project does employ RBAC through MySQL roles, I'll be taking this experience to improve as a developer.

Upon reflection of my later work, I had multiple learning opportunities. For one, implementing TDE reinforced the need to stay aware of current security trends. This was because I began the module using the deprecated keyring plugin (since I’d been vaguely familiar with it prior) before further researching and utilizing the modern component keyrings. Two challenges I encountered was losing connection to the database on startup due to misconfigured config/manifest files and enforcing least privilege access on the various keyring folders/files without hindering the encryption. In terms of the misconfigured files, I initially mistakenly configured the .cnf file using “component_keyring_encrypted_file” rather than “component_keyring_file”, the former only being available in the Enterprise edition of MySQL. While I didn’t experience a roadblock reducing system permissions on the files/directories I created to hold the component data, I wanted to be certain I was only removing the permissions that weren’t necessary to use the keyring (Network Services on Windows for example needing full access). Above all else these roadblocks allowed me to think like a developer, and ask needed questions to uncover my own answers. 
